.\" @(#)hsfsys1.1 96/12/12 NIST
.\" I Visual Image Processing Group
.\" Michael D. Garris
.\"
.TH HSFSYS1 1 "12 December 1996"
.SH NAME
hsfsys1 \- running the updated version of the original NIST system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
.B "hsfsys1 [\-dlumsvt][\-c nodict | dict] \fI<hsffile> <outroot>\fP"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIHsfsys1\fP is an updated version of the NIST recognition system distributed
in the first release of the software. This system is designed to read the
handwriting entered on HSF forms like those included in the top-level installation 
directory \fIdata\fP. The most significant changes to this system include more
efficient memory usage (improving recognition speed) and supporting programs no
longer rely on FORTRAN coded subroutines.
.LP
The recognition system is run in batch mode with image file inputs and ASCII text
file outputs, and the system contains no Graphical User Interface.
.LP
.SH ARGUMENTS
.LP
Field type options:
.TP
.B d
Designates the processing of the digit fields on an HSF form.
.TP
.B l
Designates the processing of the lowercase field on an HSF form.
.TP
.B u
Designates the processing of the uppercase field on an HSF form.
.TP
.B c
Designates the processing of the Constitution field on an HSF form. This option
requires an argument. If the argument \fInodict\fP is specified, then no
dictionary\-based postprocessing is performed and the raw character
classifications and associated confidence values are reported. If the argument
\fIdict\fP is specified, then dictionary\-based postprocessing is performed and
matched words from the dictionary are reported without any confidence values.
.LP
The options \-dluc can be used in any combination. For example, use only the \-l
option to process the lowercase field, or use only the \-d option to process all
of the digit fields. If processing both lowercase and uppercase fields, then
specify both options \-l and \-u (or an equivalent syntax \-lu). The system
processes all of the fields on the form if no field type options are specified,
and dictionary\-based postprocessing is performed on the Constitution field
by default.
.LP
Memory control options:
.TP
.B m
Specifies the use of alternative prototype files for classification that have
fewer training patterns, so that machines with limited main memory may be able
to completely process all the fields on an HSF form. In general, decreasing the
number of training prototypes reduces the accuracy of the recognition system's
classifier. It is recommended that this option be used only when necessary.
.LP
Message control options:
.TP
.B s
Specifies that the silent mode is to be used and all messages sent to standard
output and standard error are suppressed except upon the detection of a fatal
internal error. Silent mode facilitates silent batch processing and overrides
the verbose mode option. By default, the system posts its recognition results
to standard output as each field is processed.
.TP
.B v
Specifies that the verbose mode is to be used so that messages providing a
functional trace through the system are printed to standard error.
.TP
.B t
Specifies that timing data is to be collected on system functions and reported
to a timing file upon system completion.
.LP
File name specifications:
.TP
.I hsffile
Specifies the binary HSF image in IHead format that is to be read by the system.
The IHead file format is documented by the routine \fIReadBinaryRaster()\fP
found in \fIsrc/lib/image/readrast.c\fP.
.TP
.I outroot
Specifies the root file name that is to be appended to the front of each output
file generated by the system. Upon completion, the system will create a hypothesis
file with the extension \fIhyp \fP and a confidence file with the extension \fIcon\fP.
If the \-t option is specified, a timing file with the extension \fItim\fP will
also be created. These text files can be manipulated as FET files, the format of
which is documented by the routine \fIwritefetfile()\fP in \fIsrc/lib/fet/writefet.c\fP.
.LP
.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
To run the system in verbose mode on all the HSF fields on the form in
\fIdata/f0000_1\fP and store the system results in the same location with the
same root name as the form, the following commands are equivalent (assuming the
installation directory is \fI/usr/local/hsfsys2\fP). In each case, the files
\fIf0000_14.hyp\fP and \fIf0000_14.con\fP will be created in the directory
\fI/usr/local/hsfsys2/data/f0000_14\fP.
.LP
.nf
.B "% hsfsys1 -v /usr/local/hsfsys2/data/f0000_14/f0000_14.pct /usr/local/hsfsys2/data/f0000_14/f0000_14"
.fi
.LP
.nf
.B "% hsfsys1 -v /usr/local/hsfsys2/data/f0000_14/f0000_14.{pct,}"
.fi
.LP
.nf
.B "% (cd /usr/local/hsfsys2/data/f0000_14; hsfsys1 -v f0000_14.pct ./f0000_14)"
.fi
.LP
To run the system in silent mode on only the digit and uppercase fields on the same
form with results including timing data all stored in \fI/tmp\fP with the root name
\fIfoo\fP, the following command can be used. In this example, the files created by
the system will be \fI/tmp/foo.hyp\fP, \fI/tmp/foo.con\fP, and \fI/tmp/foo.tim\fP.
.LP
.nf
.B "% hsfsys1 -stdu /usr/local/hsfsys2/data/f0000_14/f0000_14.pct /tmp/foo"
.fi
