.\" @(#)hsfsys2.1 96/12/12 NIST
.\" I Visual Image Processing Group
.\" Michael D. Garris
.\"
.TH HSFSYS2 1 "12 December 1996"
.SH NAME
hsfsys2 \- running the new release of the NIST system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
.B "hsfsys2 [\-dlusv][\-c nodict | dict][\-t \fI<timefile>\fP] \fI<listfile>\fP"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIHsfsys2\fP is the second release of the NIST recognition system. This system
contains significant technical improvements over its predecessor \fIhsfsys1\fP.
It uses a method of generalized form registration, intelligent form removal, 
adaptive character segmentaion, a new robust MLP\-based classifier, among other
improved techniques. \fIHsfsys2\fP is designed to read the handwriting entered
on HSF forms like those included in the top\-level installation directory
\fIdata\fP, and it is capable of reading every HSF form included in
\fINIST Special Database 19\fP.
.LP
The recognition system is run in batch mode with image file inputs and ASCII text
file outputs, and the system contains no Graphical User Interface.
.LP
.SH ARGUMENTS
.LP
Field type options:
.TP
.B d
Designates the processing of the digit fields on an HSF form.
.TP
.B l
Designates the processing of the lowercase field on an HSF form.
.TP
.B u
Designates the processing of the uppercase field on an HSF form.
.TP
.B c
Designates the processing of the Constitution field on an HSF form. This option
requires an argument. If the argument \fInodict\fP is specified, then no
dictionary\-based postprocessing is performed and the raw character
classifications and associated confidence values are reported. If the argument
\fIdict\fP is specified, then dictionary\-based postprocessing is performed and
matched words from the dictionary are reported without any confidence values.
.LP
The options \-dluc can be used in any combination. For example, use only the \-l
option to process the lowercase field, or use only the \-d option to process all
of the digit fields. If processing both lowercase and uppercase fields, then
specify both options \-l and \-u (or an equivalent syntax \-lu). The system
processes all of the fields on the form if no field type options are specified,
and dictionary\-based postprocessing is performed on the Constitution field
by default.
.LP
Message control options:
.TP
.B s
Specifies that the silent mode is to be used and all messages sent to standard
output and standard error are suppressed except upon the detection of a fatal
internal error. Silent mode facilitates silent batch processing and overrides
the verbose mode option. By default, the system posts its recognition results
to standard output as each field is processed.
.TP
.B v
Specifies that the verbose mode is to be used so that messages providing a
functional trace through the system are printed to standard error.
.TP
.B "t \fI<timefile>\fP"
Specifies that timing data is to be collected on system functions and reported
to the specified timing file upon system completion.
.LP
File name specifications:
.TP
.I listfile
Is a two column ASCII file that lists all the binary HSF images in IHead format
that are to be read by the system in the current batch. The IHead file format is
documented by the routine \fIReadBinaryRaster()\fP found in
\fIsrc/lib/image/readrast.c\fP. Along with each input image file is a second column
that specifies the root file name to be appended to the front of each 
output file generated by the system when processing the corresponding form image.
An example of a list file is found in \fIdata/hsfsys2.lis\fP. Upon completion of
each form, the system will create a hypothesis file with extenstion \fIhyp\fP
and a confidence file with extension \fIcon\fP. These output text files can be
manipulated as FET files, the format of which is documented by the routine
\fIwritefetfile()\fP in \fIsrc/lib/fet/writefet.c\fP.
.LP
.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
Assuming the installation directory is \fI/usr/local/hsfsys2\fP, the following
commands can be used to run the new system in verbose mode on all the fields
on all the HSF forms in \fIdata\fP.
.LP
.B "% cd /usr/local/hsfsys2/data"
.LP
.B "% hsfsys2 -v -t hsfsys2.tim hsfsys2.lis"
