.\" @(#)mis2pat1.1 96/12/12 NIST
.\" I Visual Image Processing Group
.\" Michael D. Garris
.\"
.TH MIS2PAT1 1 "12 December 1996"
.SH NAME
mis2pat1 \- generating patterns for the PNN classifier in \fIhsfsys1\fP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
.B "mis2pat1 [\-h][\-n][\-v] \fI<classset> <evtfile> <outroot> <mfs_of_clsfiles> <mfs_of_misfiles>\fP"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This command takes a set of training images along with the eigenvectors generated
by \fImis2evt\fP and creates feature vectors that can be used as prototypes for
training the PNN classifier used in \fIhsfsys1\fP. Typically, the same images used 
to compute the eigenvectors are used here to generate prototype vectors. The
program \fImis2pat1\fP also builds a kd-tree for preclassification. The prototypes
along with their class assignments and kd-tree are stored in one patterns file,
while median vectors computed from the prototype vectors are stored in a separate
median vector file. The program's main routine is located in \fIsrc/bin/mis2pat1\fP.
.LP
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I classset
Specifies the name of a text file (MFS file) containing the labels assigned to each 
class. For example, a digit classifier uses ten classes labeled 0 through 9. 
The format of an MFS file is documented by the routine \fIwritemfsfile()\fP
found in \fIsrc/lib/mfs/writemfs.c\fP.
.TP
.I evtfile
Specifies the basis function file containing eigenvectors computed by \fImis2evt\fP. 
The number of features in each output vector is determined by the number of
eigenvectors in this file. The format of this file is documented by the routine
\fIwrite_basis()\fP found in \fIsrc/lib/nn/basis_io.c\fP.
.TP
.I outroot
Specifies the root file name of the output pattern and median vector files. The 
name of the output pattern file has extension \fIpat\fP while the median vector
file has extension \fImed\fP. The format of the patterns / kd_tree file is
documented by the routine \fIkdtreewrite()\fP in \fIsrc/lib/nn/kd_io.c\fP
whereas the median vector file format is documented by the routine
\fIwritemedianfile()\fP in \fIsrc/lib/nn/med_io.c\fP.
.TP
.I mfs_of_clsfiles
.TP
.I mfs_of_misfiles
The final two arguments are the names of text files (MFS files) that contain
listings of file names. The argument \fImfs_of_clsfiles\fP lists file names
containing class assignments corresponding to the images in the MIS files 
listed in the argument \fImfs_of_misfiles\fP. Each class assignment file must
have the same number of class assignments as there are images in its corresponding
MIS file, and the classes assigned must be consistent with those listed in the
argument \fIclassset\fP.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B h
Specifies that the class labels listed in the \fIclassset\fP file are to be converted
to ASCII characters values represented in hexadecimal. All the class assignments
in the files listed in the argument \fImfs_of_clsfiles\fP use the convention
where [30-39] represent digits, [41-5a] represent uppercase, and [61-7a] 
represent lowercase. If the \fIclassset\fP file contains alphabetic representations
such as [0-9], [A-Z], and [a-z], then this flag must be used to effect conversion
of these labels to their hexadecimal equivalents.
.TP
.B n
Specifies the storing of intermediate normalized character images. \fIMis2pat1\fP
can process binary images that are either (128X128) or (32X32). In the case of the
former, the program invokes size and slant normalization utilities to produce
32X32 images. If the input images are already 32X32, this flag has no effect.
If normalization does occur, the resulting normalized images are stored to MIS
files having the same name as those listed in \fImfs_of_misfiles\fP, with the
extension \fI32\fP appended.
.TP
.B v
Produces messages to standard output signifying the completion of each MIS file.
.LP
.SH COMMENTS
.LP
This program was used to generate the patterns files provided with this distribution
in the directory \fIweights/pnn\fP and ending with the extension \fIpat\fP and
median vector files ending with extension \fImed\fP. The patterns files contain 
KL feature vectors, their associated classes, and a kd-tree. The feature vectors
were computed using the eigenvectors found in the same directory and from the
images provided in the top-level directory \fItrain\fP. The MFS files used as
arguments to \fImis2pat1\fP are also provided in the \fIweights/pnn\fP subdirectories,
as are the \fIclassset\fP files which end with the extension \fIset\fP. The
class assignment files are listed in files ending with the extension \fIcl\fP, 
whereas the MIS files are listed in files ending with the extension \fIml\fP.
.LP
.SH EXAMPLE
.LP
The patterns file \fIweights/pnn/lower/h46_l.pat\fP and median vector file
\fIweights/pnn/lower/h46_l.med\fP were generated with the following command:
.TP
.B "% mis2pat1 -vh l.set h46_l.evt h46_l h46_l.cl h46_l.ml"
