.\" @(#)mis2evt.1 96/12/12 NIST
.\" I Visual Image Processing Group
.\" Michael D. Garris
.\"
.TH MIS2EVT 1 "12 December 1996"
.SH NAME
mis2evt \- computing eigenvectors and creating basis function files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "mis2evt [\-n][\-v] \fI<nrequiredevts> <evtfile> <mfs_of_misfiles>\fP"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This command compiles a covariance matrix and then computes its eigenvectors
from a set of segmented character images. The eigenvectors are computed once
off-line and stored in a basis function file. The recognition systems read
the basis function file during their initialization, and then reuse the
eigenvectors across all the character images segmented from fields of a
specified type.
.LP
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I nrequiredevts
Specifies the number of eigenvectors to be written to the output file.
It is also the number of KL features that will be extracted from each binary
image using the associated utilities \fImis2pat\fP and \fImis2pat2\fP. This
integer determines the dimensionality of the feature vectors that are
produced for classification. Its upper bound is the  image dimensionality
(which is 32X32=1024). Typically, this argument is specified to be much
smaller than 1024 because the KL transform optimally compacts the
representation of the image data into its first few coefficients (features).
.TP
.I evtfile
Specifies the name of the output basis function file. The format of this
file is documented by the routine \fIwrite_basis()\fP found in
\fIsrc/lib/nn/basis_io.c\fP.
.TP
.I mfs_of_misfiles
Specifies a text file that lists the names of all the MIS files containing
images that will be used to calculate the covariance matrix. This argument
is an MFS file the format of which is documented by the routine
\fIwritemfsfile()\fP found in \fIsrc/lib/mfs/writemfs.c\fP.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B n
Specifies the storing of intermediate normalized character images.
\fIMis2evt\fP can process binary images that are either (128X128) or (32X32).
In the case of the former, the program invokes a size normalization utility to
produce 32X32 images and then applies a shear transformation to reduce slant
variations. If the input images are already 32X32, this flag has no effect.
If normalization does occur, the resulting normalized images are stored to
MIS files having the same name as those listed in the MFS file, with the
additional extension \fI32\fP appended. These intermediate files offer
computational gains because usually the same images are used with
\fImis2pat\fP and \fImis2pat2\fP.
.TP
.B v
Produces messages to standard output signifying the completion of each MIS
file and other computation steps.
.LP
.SH COMMENTS
.LP
This program is computationally expensive and may require as long as 60 minutes
to compute the eigenvectors for a large set (50,000 characters) of images.
The program \fImis2evt\fP was used to generate the basis function files provided
with this distribution in the top-level directory \fIweights\fP and ending with
the extension \fIevt\fP. These files contain eigenvectors computed from the
images provided in the top-level directory \fItrain\fP. The MFS files used as
arguments to \fImis2evt\fP are also provided in \fIweights\fP and end with the
extension \fIml\fP. 
.LP
.SH EXAMPLE
.LP
The basis function file \fIweights/pnn/lower/h46_l.evt\fP was generated
with the following command:
.TP
.B "% mis2evt -v 64 h46_l.evt h46_l.ml"
