.\" @(#)trainreg.1 96/12/12 NIST
.\" I Visual Image Processing Group
.\" Michael D. Garris
.\"
.TH TRAINREG 1 "12 December 1996"
.SH NAME
trainreg \- training to register a new form
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "trainreg \fI<form_image> <out_points>\fP"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This command deskews a form image and then locates the left and right, top and bottom,
most dominant lines on the form and records their coordinates for future registration.
\fItrainreg\fP automatically detects the dominant lines and stores the resulting
x-coordinates of the left and right-most lines on the form and the y-coordinates
of the top and bottom-most lines on the form. The program's main routine is located
in the distribution directory \fIsrc/bin/trainreg\fP, and its main supporting
subroutine is found in \fIsrc/lib/hsf/regform.c\fP.
.LP
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I form_image
Specifies the name of the input file containing the image of the new form. 
This image must be in the binary (black and white) IHead file format which
is documented by the routine \fIReadBinaryRaster()\fP found in
\fIsrc/lib/image/readrast.c\fP.
.TP
.I out_points
Specifies the name of the output file to hold the coordinate positions of the 
detected dominant lines in the image. This is an MFS file, the format of which
is documented by the routine \fIwritemfsfile()\fP found in
\fIsrc/lib/mfs/writemfs.c\fP.
.LP
.SH EXAMPLE
.LP
This program was used to generate the file \fItmplt/hsfgreg.pts\fP, which is
used by \fIhsfsys2\fP to register input HSF forms. The file was created with the
following command:
.TP
.B "% trainreg hsftmplt.pct hsfgreg.pts"
.LP
.SH COMMENT
.LP
To set the new NIST recognition system up to process a different type of form,
\fItrainreg\fP must be run on a prototypical form and the output file must
be stored. In addition, the fields or zones on a registered version of the new
form must be measured manually with an interactive image display tool (not
provided with this distribution), and the coordinates of each zone must be stored
in an MFS file. The file \fItmplt/hsftmplt.pts\fP contains the zone coordinates of
a registered HSF form. The source code must be modified to load these two new files
(the coordinate file for registration and the zone coordinate file).
